Update tutorial (#6)
nextstrain/nextstrain-walkthrough: README.md

Author: Re: https://github.com/nextstrain/veme-2022/pull/6#pullrequestreview-2751470517

> I second Jennifer’s concerns about having alternate platforms for learners to run the workshop commands. I [wrote some pros/cons of different platforms back in 2022](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OPQ9rffXt0JlZT25FJP9QRvZYF8YSdEOtLMFxXdGrvU/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.s4uu9o96hv9e) which might be worth updating and documenting here in some way for future us. Binder timeouts were an issue for me back then, too.

Thanks, I forgot about that Google doc! I can see some sections of that doc living in an "internal" README in this repo. Do you mind if I make edits/comments on the doc, then move things over to this repo later?

Author: Copied to the relevant thread: https://github.com/nextstrain/veme-2022/pull/6#discussion_r2036137839

## Prerequisites

> Use the button below to launch a preconfigured environment in your web browser or Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer: [non-blocking, just thinking about supporting multiple compute vs only having one in the tutorial]

Looking online, I agree that GitHub Codespaces seems more robust than Binder. Just a note that Codespaces may require workshop attendees to have a GitHub account while Binder does not. This might be fine if we want to require all workshop attendees to have a GitHub account. 

The other thing to consider is cost (hopefully free). Codespaces seems to have a [cap on compute before it requires switching to a pro account](https://docs.github.com/en/billing/managing-billing-for-your-products/managing-billing-for-github-codespaces/about-billing-for-github-codespaces#monthly-included-storage-and-core-hours-for-personal-accounts). Binder has a [per session memory cap but otherwise seems free](https://mybinder.readthedocs.io/en/latest/about/user-guidelines.html#how-much-memory-am-i-given-when-using-binder).  

My tendency is to provide both (to give people options or certain options change in the future) but recommend one (GitHub Codespaces) during a workshop. If they've reached the cap of Codespaces, they can try Binder. However, feel free to tailor this for your workshop audience.

Author: Fair point! I'll put Binder back (revert 0a2fd2faad799777a35b36d185aa570894007341) but will ask my workshop attendees to use GitHub Codespaces if they are able to.

Author: from https://github.com/nextstrain/veme-2022/pull/6#pullrequestreview-2751470517:

> I second Jennifer’s concerns about having alternate platforms for learners to run the workshop commands. I [wrote some pros/cons of different platforms back in 2022](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OPQ9rffXt0JlZT25FJP9QRvZYF8YSdEOtLMFxXdGrvU/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.s4uu9o96hv9e) which might be worth updating and documenting here in some way for future us. Binder timeouts were an issue for me back then, too.

Thanks, I forgot about that Google doc! I can see some sections of that doc living in an "internal" README in this repo. Do you mind if I make edits/comments on the doc, then move things over to this repo later?

Author: I've replaced 0a2fd2faad799777a35b36d185aa570894007341 with d14761b which explains the 3 options (GitHub codespace, Binder, local installation) in more detail.

Reviewer 2: > Do you mind if I make edits/comments on the doc, then move things over to this repo later?

For sure. Thanks!

## Prerequisites

Use the button below to launch a preconfigured environment in your web browser or Visual Studio Code.

[![Open in GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/codespaces/badge.svg)](https://codespaces.new/nextstrain/veme-2022)

If you want to use your local environment on your personal computer, you will need to:

  - [Install Nextstrain](https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/install.html) on your computer or launch one of the virtual machine providers listed above.

>   - Clone this repository with `git clone https://github.com/nextstrain/veme-2022.git` and change into the resulting `veme-2022` directory.

Reviewer 3: This is probably a bigger discussion than is appropriate for the bounds of this PR, but: perhaps we should consider renaming the repo to something more descriptive, more generic, and less dated looking?

Author: The scope of this PR is intentionally broad as "update everything", so I think good to discuss here. My proposed rename is "nextstrain-walkthrough" with the same reasoning as in 6fd86ec1af527fa3dec8cbaab24e0bec335a561b.

Reviewer 3: +1 for `nextstrain-walkthrough` ...but i will see your bikeshed and raise you `nextstrain-tour`?

Author: Hmm... when I think "tour", I imagine something more hands-off, like visiting all the existing analyses on nextstrain.org and pointing out the datasets/curated data that we have made available. "walkthrough" seems more fitting for the hands-on step-by-step tutorial here.

Thinking about the various outreach projects I'm preparing, "Nextstrain tour" is fitting for both the 30 minute webinar and conference poster, while "Nextstrain walkthrough" is fitting for the 90 minute workshop.

Reviewer 3: > Hmm... when I think "tour", I imagine something more hands-off, like visiting all the existing analyses on nextstrain.org and pointing out the datasets/curated data that we have made available. "walkthrough" seems more fitting for the hands-on step-by-step tutorial here.

Fair enough — at least part of my motivation was just trying to come up with something shorter and maybe less prone to misspelling than "through" — I always have to think about that, just for a second.

Author: "walkthru"? 😆 maybe after using it 100 times it'll feel normal like "drive thru"...

Author: from https://github.com/nextstrain/veme-2022/pull/6#pullrequestreview-2751470517:

> “nextstrain-walkthrough” or “tour” etc. don’t tell me much about the contents or scope of the tutorial. What if we consider the name of these materials in the context of the official docs where these will be a tutorial? In that context, how would you describe the materials?

Great point. I think the scope is well defined in the README already:

https://github.com/nextstrain/veme-2022/blob/d187ba0da5246af45e8e9cce1f2b2dad38259366/README.md#L16-L26

I previously mentioned in https://github.com/nextstrain/docs.nextstrain.org/pull/244#discussion_r2017638014 that this tutorial is a rehashed version of "[Creating a phylogenetic workflow](https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/tutorials/creating-a-phylogenetic-workflow.html)", but that's only partially true. While there is lots of overlap (filter/align/refine/traits/ancestral/export), this tutorial has additional frequencies and clades (maybe simply due to example data being SARS-CoV-2?) while "Creating a phylogenetic workflow" brings Snakemake into the mix, though not in detail.

SARS-CoV-2 is used for example data but I don't think it should be mentioned in the tutorial name – we have existing SARS-CoV-2 tutorials which are about using the ncov workflow, a much different scope. However, not mentioning the pathogen makes it harder to differentiate this one and "Creating a phylogenetic workflow". When putting this new tutorial into the official docs, we may have to rethink/rename some of the other existing tutorials. I'll think more about this...

Reviewer 2: I've thought for a while now that we could replace the current "creating a phylogenetic workflow" tutorial with this VEME content and talk about the more advanced aspects of building a Snakemake workflow in a different tutorial.

Author: I was thinking that too, but as more than just a direct replacement:

- I'd like to reconsider the name "creating a phylogenetic workflow", at least by dropping the term "workflow" since that's beyond the scope.
- "Running a phylogenetic workflow" shouldn't point to this with the existing phrasing of "learn how to create the workflow in this tutorial", unless we want to replace the underlying data and workflow used in that tutorial.
- Maybe this is too much to do now, but I'd also like to replace the current "running a phylogenetic workflow" tutorial. I'm not sure what purpose it serves now other than familiarizing users with `git clone`+`nextstrain build`+`nextstrain view`, since none of our existing workflows can be run simply by these 3 commands. At the very least, it should change soon with the release of `nextstrain run`.

Author: I've renamed as `nextstrain-walkthrough` for now. While it's not perfect, I think it's at least more self-descriptive than `veme-2022` and will be useful for initial sharing of the draft.

Author: Continuing conversation in https://github.com/nextstrain/nextstrain-walkthrough/issues/9

Augur's tree subcommand is a lightweight wrapper around existing tree builders, providing some standardization of the input alignment and output across tools.
We use IQ-TREE by default, but other options include FastTree and RAxML.

> Note: All tree builders used by Augur are maximum-likelihood (ML) tools, enabling the "real-time" part of Nextstrain’s mission at the expense of the posterior and more sophisticated models available through Bayesian methods.
> The ML approach enables rapid prototyping to identify genomes to include in a more complex, longer-running Bayesian analysis.

``` bash
augur tree \
  --alignment results/aligned.fasta \
  --output results/tree_raw.nwk
```

We can view the divergence tree by loading `tree_raw.nwk` in [auspice.us](https://auspice.us/).

You should see a view like this:

![tree_raw.nwk in auspice.us](images/tree_raw.jpeg)

> Let's familiarize with the Auspice interface. The main view is an interactive phylogenetic tree. To the left are controls for the main view. There is not much going on because Newick files lack additional data that powers most of the Auspice interface. We will add those in the next steps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's familiarize ourselves with the Auspice interface. The main view is an interactive phylogenetic tree. To the left are controls for the main view. There is not much going on with this particular visualization, because Newick files lack the additional data that powers most of the Auspice interface. We will add that in the next steps.
```

Author: Added in d187ba0da5246af45e8e9cce1f2b2dad38259366

  --metadata results/subsampled_metadata.tsv \
  --color-by-metadata country \
  --geo-resolutions country \
  --output auspice/nextstrain-walkthrough.json
```

> View the tree with additional metadata in Auspice. It should look something like below. Note the newly added info.

Reviewer 3: there's no "below"?

Author: Oops. I had written the text part of 96f464c536b11b77c838d2d3820b317fa4081e16 and started adding screenshots, then decided I should post this for review first before finishing that commit. I'll still wait for more commentary, but the general idea is that there will be screenshots after each `augur export` command. I've added placeholders in d187ba0da5246af45e8e9cce1f2b2dad38259366 so that work in progress is more obvious.
